Here have you seena mighty King,
His child, I wis, toincest bring;
A better prince and benignlord,
That will prove awful bothin deed and word.
Be quiet then as menshould be,
Till he hath pass'dnecessity.
I'll show you those introubles reign,
Losing a mite, a mountaingain.
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison,
Is still at Tarsus, whereeach man
Thinks all is writ hespoken can;
And, to remember what hedoes,
Build his statue to makehim glorious:
But tidings to thecontrary
Are brought your eyes;what need speak I?
Good Helicane, hath stay'dat home,
Not to eat honey like adrone
From others' labours; forthough he strive
To killen bad, keep goodalive;
And to fulfil his prince'desire,
Sends word of all thathaps in Tyre:
How Thaliard came fullbent with sin
And had intent to murderhim;
And that in Tarsus was notbest
Longer for him to make hisrest.
He, doing so, put forth toseas,
Where when men been,there's seldom ease;
For now the wind begins toblow;
Thunder above and deepsbelow
Make such unquiet, thatthe ship
Should house him safe iswreck'd and split;
And he, good prince,having all lost,
By waves from coast tocoast is tost:
All perishen of man, ofpelf,
Ne aught escapen buthimself;
Till fortune, tired withdoing bad,
Threw him ashore, to givehim glad:
And here he comes. Whatshall be next,
Pardon old Gower,--thislongs the text.
Yet cease your ire, youangry stars of heaven!
Wind, rain, and thunder,remember, earthly man
Is but a substance thatmust yield to you;
And I, as fits my nature,do obey you:
Alas, the sea hath cast meon the rocks,
Wash'd me from shore toshore, and left me breath
Nothing to think on butensuing death:
Let it suffice thegreatness of your powers
To have bereft a prince ofall his fortunes;
And having thrown him fromyour watery grave,
Here to have death inpeace is all he'll crave.
What, ho, Pilch!
Ha, come and bring awaythe nets!
What, Patch-breech, I say!
What say you, master?
Look how thou stirrestnow! come away, or I'll
fetch thee with a wanion.
Faith, master, I am thinkingof the poor men that
were cast away before useven now.
Alas, poor souls, it grievedmy heart to hear what
pitiful cries they made tous to help them, when,
well-a-day, we couldscarce help ourselves.
Nay, master, said not I asmuch when I saw the
porpus how he bounced andtumbled? they say
they're half fish, halfflesh: a plague on them,
they ne'er come but I lookto be washed. Master, I
marvel how the fishes livein the sea.
Why, as men do a-land; thegreat ones eat up the
little ones: I can compareyour rich misers to
nothing so fitly as to awhale; a' plays and
tumbles, driving the poorfry before him, and at
last devours them all at amouthful: such whales
have I heard on o' the land,who never leave gaping
till they've swallowed thewhole parish, church,
steeple, bells, and all.
A pretty moral.
But, master, if I hadbeen the sexton,
I would have been thatday in the belfry.
Why, man?
Because he should haveswallowed me too: and when I
had been in his belly, Iwould have kept such a
jangling of the bells, thathe should never have left,
till he cast bells,steeple, church,
and parish up again. But ifthe good King Simonides
were of my mind,--
Simonides!
We would purge the land ofthese drones, that rob
the bee of her honey.
How from the finnysubject of the sea
These fishers tell theinfirmities of men;
And from their wateryempire recollect
All that may men approveor men detect!
Peace be at your labour,honest fishermen.
Honest! good fellow, what'sthat? If it be a day fits you,
search out of the calendar,and nobody look after it.
May see the sea hath castupon your coast.
What a drunken knave was thesea to cast thee in our way!
A man whom both thewaters and the wind,
In that vast tennis-court,have made the ball
For them to play upon,entreats you pity him:
He asks of you, that neverused to beg.
No, friend, cannot youbeg? Here's them in our
land of Greece getsmore with begging
than we can get with working.
Canst thou catch anyfishes, then?
I never practised it.
Nay, then thou wilt starve,sure; for here's nothing
to be got now-a-days, unlessthou canst fish for't.
What I have been I haveforgot to know;
But what I am, wantteaches me to think on:
A man throng'd up withcold: my veins are chill,
And have no more of lifethan may suffice
To give my tongue thatheat to ask your help;
Which if you shall refuse,when I am dead,
For that I am a man, praysee me buried.
Die quoth-a? Now godsforbid! I have a coat here;
come, put it on; keep theewarm. Now, afore me,
a handsome fellow! Come,thou shalt go home,
and we'll have fleshfor holidays,
fish for fasting-days,and moreo'er puddings
and flap-jacks, andthou shalt be welcome.
I thank you, sir.
Hark you, my friend; yousaid you could not beg.
I did but crave.
But crave! Then I'll turncraver too, and so I
shall 'scape whipping.
Why, are all your beggarswhipped, then?
O, not all, my friend, notall; for if all your
beggars were whipped, Iwould wish no better office
than to be beadle. But, master,I'll go draw up the net.
How well this honest mirthbecomes their labour!
Hark you, friend, do you knowwhere ye are?
Not well.
Why, I'll tell thee: thisis called Pentapolis,
and our king thegood Simonides.
The good Simonides,do you call him.
Ay, sir; and he deservesso to be called for his
peaceable reign and goodgovernment.
He is a happy king, sincehe gains from his subjects
the name of good by hisgovernment. How far is his
court distant from thisshore?
Marry, sir, halfa day's journey:
and I'll tell thee, hehath a fair daughter,
and to-morrow is her birth-day;and there be knights
and princes come from allparts of the world to just
and tourney for her love.
Were my fortunesequal to my desires,
I could wish to make one there.
O, sir, things must be asthey may; and what a man
may not get, he may lawfullydeal for--his wife's soul.
Help, master, help! here'sa fish hangs in the net,
like a poor man's right in thelaw; 'twill hardly come out.
Ha! bots on't, 'tiscome at last,
and 'tis turned toa rusty armour.
An armour, friends! I prayyou, let me see it.
Thanks, fortune, yet, that,after all my crosses,
Thou givest me somewhat torepair myself;
And though it was mineown, part of my heritage,
Which my dead father didbequeath to me.
With this strict charge,even as he left his life,
'Keep it, my Pericles; ithath been a shield
Twixt me and death;'--andpointed to this brace;--
'For that it saved me, keepit; in like necessity--
The which the godsprotect thee from!--
may defend thee.'
It kept where I kept, I sodearly loved it;
Till the rough seas, thatspare not any man,
Took it in rage, thoughcalm'd have given't again:
I thank thee for't: myshipwreck now's no ill,
Since I have here myfather's gift in's will.
What mean you, sir?
To beg of you, kind friends,this coat of worth,
For it was sometime targetto a king;
I know it by this mark. Heloved me dearly,
And for his sake I wishthe having of it;
And that you'ld guide meto your sovereign's court,
Where with it I may appeara gentleman;
And if that ever my lowfortune's better,
I'll pay your bounties;till then rest your debtor.
Why, wilt thou tourney forthe lady?
I'll show the virtue Ihave borne in arms.
Why, do 'e take it, and thegods give thee good on't!
Ay, but hark you, my friend;'twas we that made up
this garment through therough seams of the waters:
there are certaincondolements, certain vails.
I hope, sir, if you thrive,you'll remember from
whence you had it.
Believe 't, I will.
By your furtherance I amclothed in steel;
And, spite of all therapture of the sea,
This jewel holds hisbuilding on my arm:
Unto thy value I willmount myself
Upon a courser, whosedelightful steps
Shall make the gazer joyto see him tread.
Only, my friend, I yet amunprovided
Of a pair of bases.
We'll sure provide: thoushalt have my best gown to
make thee a pair; and I'llbring thee to the court myself.
Then honour be but equalto my will,
This day I'll rise, orelse add ill to ill.
(♪ music)
Are the knights ready tobegin the triumph?
They are, my liege;
And stay your coming topresent themselves.
Return them, we are ready;and our daughter,
In honour of whose birththese triumphs are,
Sits here, like beauty'schild, whom nature gat
For men to see, and seeingwonder at.
It pleaseth you, my royalfather, to express
My commendations great,whose merit's less.
It's fit it should be so;for princes are
A model which heaven makeslike to itself:
As jewels lose their gloryif neglected,
So princes their renownsif not respected.
'Tis now your honour,daughter, to entertain
The labour of each knightin his device.
Which, to preserve minehonour, I'll perform.
Who is the first that dothprefer himself?
A knight of Sparta, myrenowned father;
And the device he bearsupon his shield
Is a black Ethiopereaching at the sun
The word, 'Lux tua vitamihi.'
He loves you well thatholds his life of you.
Who is the second thatpresents himself?
A prince of Macedon, myroyal father;
And the device he bearsupon his shield
Is an arm'd knight that'sconquer'd by a lady;
The motto thus, in Spanish,
'Piu por dulzuraque por fuerza.'
Ah, May gentleness, not force,win me the day.
And what's the third?
The third of Antioch;
And his device, a wreathof chivalry;
The word, 'Me pompaeprovexit apex.'
Desire to gain renoun hath setme on
This is the fourth.
A burning torch that'sturned upside down;
The word, 'Quod me alit,me extinguit.'
Which shows that beautyhath his power and will,
It can as well inflameas it can kill.
The fifth, an handenvironed with clouds,
Holding out gold that's bythe touchstone tried;
The motto thus, 'Sicspectanda fides.'
Thus can you try unlastingfaithfulness.
And what's the sixth and last,
the which the knight himself
With such a gracefulcourtesy deliver'd?
He seems to be a stranger;but his present is
A wither'd branch, that'sonly green at top;
The motto, 'In hac spevivo.'
A pretty moral;
In this hope, I live.
From the dejected statewherein he is,
He hopes by you hisfortunes yet may flourish.
He had need mean betterthan his outward show
Can any way speak in hisjust commend;
For by his rusty outsidehe appears
To have practised more thewhipstock than the lance.
He well may be a stranger,for he comes
To an honour'd triumphstrangely furnished.
And on set purpose let hisarmour rust
Until this day, to scourit in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool, thatmakes us scan
The outward habit by theinward man.
But stay, the knights arecoming: we will withdraw
Into the gallery.
(♪ music and the sound of a crowd)
(horses hooves and chantingcrowds)
Knights,
To say you're welcome weresuperfluous.
To place upon the volumeof your deeds,
As in a title-page, yourworth in arms,
Were more than you expect,or more than's fit,
Since every worth in showcommends itself.
Prepare for mirth, formirth becomes a feast:
You are princes and myguests.
But you, my knight andguest;
To whom this wreath ofvictory I give,
And crown you king of thisday's happiness.
'Tis more by fortune,lady, than by merit.
Call it by what you will,the day is yours;
And here, I hope, is nonethat envies it.
In framing an artist, arthath thus decreed,
To make some good, butothers to exceed;
And you are herlabour'd scholar.
Come, queen o' the feast,--
For, daughter, so you are,--
here take your place:
Marshal the rest, as theydeserve their grace.
We are honour'd much bygood Simonides.
Your presence glads ourdays: honour we love;
For who hates honour hatesthe gods above.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not, sir; for weare gentlemen
That neither in our heartsnor outward eyes
Envy the great nor do thelow despise.
You are right courteousknights.
Sit, sir, sit.
By Jove, I wonder, that isking of thoughts,
These cates resist me, hebut thought upon.
By Juno, that is queen ofmarriage,
All viands that I eat doseem unsavoury.
Wishing him my meat. Sure,he's a gallant gentleman.
He's but a countrygentleman;
Has done no more thanother knights have done;
Has broken a staff or so;so let it pass.
To me he seems likediamond to glass.
Yon king's to me like tomy father's picture,
Which tells me in thatglory once he was;
Had princes sit, likestars, about his throne,
And he the sun, for themto reverence;
None that beheld him, but,like lesser lights,
Did vail their crowns tohis supremacy:
Where now his son's like aglow-worm in the night,
The which hath fire indarkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that Time'sthe king of men,
He's both their parent,and he is their grave,
And gives them what hewill, not what they crave.
What, are you merry,knights?
Who can be other in thisroyal presence?
Here, with a cup that'sstored unto the brim,--
As you do love, fill toyour mistress' lips,--
We drink this health toyou.
We thank your grace.
Yet pause awhile:
Yon knight doth sit toomelancholy,
As if the entertainment inour court
Had not a show mightcountervail his worth.
Note it not you, Thaisa?
What is't to me, my father?
O, attend, my daughter:
Princes in this shouldlive like gods above,
Who freely give to everyone that comes
To honour them:
Therefore to make hisentertain more sweet,
Here, say we drink thisstanding-bowl of wine to him.
Alas, my father, it befitsnot me
Unto a stranger knight tobe so bold:
He may my proffer take foran offence,
Since men take women'sgifts for impudence.
How!
Do as I bid you, or you'llmove me else.
Now, by the gods, he couldnot please me better.
And furthermore tell him,we desire to know
Of whence he is, his nameand parentage.
The king my father, sir,has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much bloodunto your life.
I thank both him and you,and pledge him freely.
And further he desires toknow of you,
Of whence you are, yourname and parentage.
A gentleman of Tyre; myname, Pericles;
My education been in artsand arms;
Who, looking foradventures in the world,
Was by the rough seas reftof ships and men,
And after shipwreck drivenupon this shore.
He thanks your grace;names himself Pericles,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Who only by misfortune ofthe seas
Bereft of ships and men,cast on this shore.
Now, by the gods, I pityhis misfortune,
And will awake him fromhis melancholy.
Come, gentlemen, we sittoo long on trifles,
And waste the time, whichlooks for other revels.
(laughing)
Even in your armours, asyou are address'd,
Will very well become asoldier's dance.
I will not have excuse,with saying this
Loud music is too harshfor ladies' heads,
Since they love men inarms as well as beds.
(♪ music)
So, this was well ask'd,'twasso well perform'd.
Come, sir;
Here is a lady that wantsbreathing too:
And I have heard, youknights of Tyre
Are excellent in makingladies trip;
And that their measuresare as excellent.
In those that practisethem they are, my lord.
O, that's as much as youwould be denied
Of your fair courtesy.
Unclasp, unclasp:
Thanks, gentlemen, to all;all have done well.
But you the best.Pages and lights,
To conduct these knights untotheir several lodgings!
Yours, sir, We have givenorder to be next our own.
I am at your grace'spleasure.
Princes, it is too late totalk of love;
And that's the mark I knowyou level at:
Therefore each one betakehim to his rest;
To-morrow all for speedingdo their best.
No, Escanes, know this ofme,
Antiochus from incestlived not free:
For which, the most highgods not minding longer
To withhold the vengeancethat they had in store,
Due to this heinouscapital offence,
Even in the height andpride of all his glory,
When he was seated in achariot
Of an inestimable value,and his daughter with him,
A fire from heaven cameand shrivell'd up
Their bodies, even toloathing; for they so stunk,
That all those eyes adoredthem ere their fall
Scorn now their handshould give them burial.
'Twas very strange.
And yet but justice;
for though this king were great,his greatness was no guard
To bar heaven's shaft, butsin had his reward.
'Tis very true.
See, not a man in privateconference
Or council has respectwith him but he.
It shall no longer grievewithout reproof.
And cursed be he that willnot second it.
Follow me, then.
Lord Helicane, a word.
With me? and welcome:happy day, my lords.
Know that our griefs arerisen to the top,
And now at length theyoverflow their banks.
Your griefs! for what? wrongnot your prince you love.
Wrong not yourself, then,noble Helicane;
But if the prince do live,let us salute him,
Or know what ground's madehappy by his breath.
If in the world he live,we'll seek him out;
If in his grave he rest,we'll find him there;
And be resolved he livesto govern us,
Or dead, give's cause tomourn his funeral,
And leave us to our freeelection.
Whose death indeed's thestrongest in our censure:
And knowing this kingdomis without a head,--
Like goodly buildings leftwithout a roof
Soon fall to ruin,--yournoble self,
That best know how to ruleand how to reign,
We thus submit unto,--oursovereign.
Live, noble Helicane!
By honour's cause,forbear your suffrages:
If that you love PrincePericles, forbear.
Take I your wish, I leapinto the seas,
Where's hourly trouble fora minute's ease.
A twelvemonth longer, letme entreat you
Further to bear the absence ofyour king:
If in which time expired,he not return,
I shall with aged patiencebear your yoke.
But if I cannot win you tothis love,
Go search like nobles,like noble subjects,
And in your search spendyour adventurous worth;
Whom if you find, and winunto return,
You shall like diamondssit about his crown.
To wisdom he's a fool thatwill not yield;
And since Lord Helicaneenjoineth us,
We with our travels willendeavour it.
Then you love us, we you,and we'll clasp hands:
When peers thus knit, akingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the goodSimonides.
Knights, from my daughterthis I let you know,
That for this twelvemonthshe'll not undertake
A married life.
Her reason to herself isonly known,
Which from her by nomeans can I get.
May we not get access toher, my lord?
'Faith, by no means; shehas so strictly tied
Her to her chamber, that'tis impossible.
One twelve moons moreshe'll wear Diana's livery;
This by the eye of Cynthiahath she vow'd
And on her virgin honourwill not break it.
Loath to bid farewell, wetake our leaves.
So, They are well dispatch'd;now to my daughter's letter:
She tells me here, she'dwed the stranger knight,
Or never more to view norday nor light.
'Tis well, mistress; yourchoice agrees with mine;
I like that well: nay, howabsolute she's in't,
Not minding whether Idislike or no!
Well, I do commend herchoice;
And will no longer have itbe delay'd.
Soft! here he comes: Imust dissemble it.
All fortune to the goodSimonides!
To you as much, sir! I ambeholding to you
For your sweet musicthis last night:
I do protest my earswere never better fed
With such delightfulpleasing harmony.
It is your grace'spleasure to commend;
Not my desert.
Sir, you are music'smaster.
The worst of all herscholars, my good lord.
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of mydaughter, sir?
A most virtuous princess.
And she is fair too, isshe not?
As a fair day in summer,wondrous fair.
Sir, my daughter thinksvery well of you;
Ay, so well, that you mustbe her master,
And she will be your scholar:therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for herschoolmaster.
She thinks not so; perusethis writing else.
What's here?
A letter, that she lovesthe knight of Tyre!
'Tis the king's subtletyto have my life.
O, seek not to entrap me,gracious lord,
A stranger and distressedgentleman,
That never aim'd so highto love your daughter,
But bent all offices tohonour her.
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter,and thou art a villain.
By the gods, I have not:
Never did thought of minelevy offence;
Nor never did my actionsyet commence
A deed might gain her loveor your displeasure.
Traitor, thou liest.
Traitor!
Ay, traitor.
Even in his throat--unlessit be the king--
That calls me traitor, Ireturn the lie.
Now, by the gods, I doapplaud his courage.
My actions are as noble asmy thoughts,
That never relish'd of abase descent.
I came unto your court forhonour's cause,
And not to be a rebel toher state;
And he that otherwiseaccounts of me,
This sword shall provehe's honour's enemy.
No?
Here comes my daughter,she can witness it.
Then, as you are asvirtuous as fair,
Resolve your angry father,if my tongue
Did ere solicit, or myhand subscribe
To any syllable that madelove to you.
Why, sir, say if you had,
Who takes offence at thatwould make me glad?
Yea, mistress, are you soperemptory?
I am glad on't with all myheart.--
I'll tame you; I'll bringyou in subjection.
Will you, not having myconsent,
Bestow your love and youraffections
Upon a stranger?
who, for aught I know,
May be, nor can I thinkthe contrary,
As great in blood as Imyself.--
Therefore hear you,mistress; either frame
Your will to mine,--andyou, sir, hear you,
Either be ruled by me, orI will make you--
Man and wife:
Nay, come, your hands andlips must seal it too:
And being join'd, I'llthus your hopes destroy;
And for a furthergrief,--God give you joy!--
What, are you bothpleased?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Even as my life, or bloodthat fosters it.
What, are you both agreed?
Yes, if it please yourmajesty.
It pleaseth me so well,that I will see you wed;
And then with what hasteyou can get you to bed.